My only experience making a vocal product has been in singing the assignments to submit on-line for a vocal class, for which I was producer and engineer. I do think there was an element of producer in these projects: even though the song options were limited and arrangements provided (which I key-shifted as required) I have a developed taste and was striving for musicality and a compelling emotional message in the final song as well as attempting to master the technical challenge as a singer-in-learning. The choices which producer-me offered to singer-me were limited to my imagination and experience, as well as imitating the demo vocal, but I did perceive the intention I had identified prior to recording while I was singing, and certainly evaluated my actual performance against that goal when playing back. Engineer-me did my best to facilitate work-flow by preparing and operating the DAW as best I knew how.

This communication involved only talking to myself, but "communication" raises several issues. Ideally, the artist and producer are collaborating as equals and without any coercion by a third party such as the label, and so partners trusting each other's contribution to create the most powerful and effective vocal product. First, content: the producer must articulate comments clearly and in a way that the artist is most likely to understand, and have assurance that the comments were indeed understood. The sender is responsible for the receiver grasping the meaning of the message. Facial expression or a gesture may suffice, but perhaps a particular vocabulary is required. A second issue is the manner in which the communication is delivered. Some artists are likely to perform best when supported by sugary flowery explicitly tender and formally respectful suggestions, while others may rebel against BS and prefer blunt comments or even polite orders; most are probably in the middle and expect office/workplace-appropriate style. I think it is incumbent on the producer to intuit this and work out a communication protocol that both maintains both the best working relationship with the artist as well as crafts the finest product.

The producer communicates with the artist to influence the artist's behavior--sing to meet the producer's direction or create anticipated but as-yet-undefined magic. In the interview on the next page of the lesson, Miles Walker uses the word "motivate." The artist is likely distracted by anxiety from any number of sources related to the task of singing, and so the producer has a large degree of control--particularly of work flow schedule and influencing the emotional environment. The producer may intuit the state-of-mind of the artist which is likely to yield the desired vocal product--produce and capture MAGIC--and "communicate" the environment which will facilitate that state-of-mind. A successful producer will likely influence the artist with communication which has been crafted in content and delivery and setting to best achieve the desired result of the greatest possible vocal performance.